[DOC-1210][yba][2026.1] Configure EarlyOOM for universes (#30503)
yugabyte/yugabyte-db: docs/content/stable/yugabyte-platform/create-deployments/create-universe-multi-zone.md

Before you start creating a universe, ensure that you have created a provider configuration as described in [Create provider configurations](../../configure-yugabyte-platform/).

### Additional settings

#### Configure ClockBound (optional)

{{<tags/feature/ea idea="2133">}}[ClockBound](https://github.com/aws/clock-bound) improves clock accuracy and reduces read-restart errors in YSQL. To enable ClockBound for [cloud provider](../../configure-yugabyte-platform/aws/) universes, set the provider's `yb.provider.configure_clockbound_cloud_provisioning` runtime configuration flag to `true` (before creating the universe). Refer to [Manage runtime configuration settings](../../administer-yugabyte-platform/manage-runtime-config/).

When enabled, ClockBound is automatically configured during node provisioning, and the universe creation task sets the [time_source](../../../reference/configuration/yb-master/#time-source) flag to `clockbound`.

ClockBound is supported on AWS and GCP. Azure and Kubernetes deployments are not supported.

#### Configure EarlyOOM (optional)

> {{<tags/feature/ea idea="1804">}} EarlyOOM runs on database nodes and kills processes under extreme memory pressure to prevent VM hangs (it prefers keeping PostgreSQL).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{<tags/feature/ea idea="1804">}} EarlyOOM is a process that runs on database nodes. When the VM is under extreme memory pressure, EarlyOOM will selectively kill processes, while preserving PostgreSQL processes, to prevent the VM from crashing.
```

| Action | Details |
| :----- | :------ |
| Enable EarlyOOM | Set the **Enables Earlyoom Installation on Nodes** Global Runtime Configuration option (config key `yb.ui.feature_flags.enable_earlyoom`) to true. |
| Enable by default for new universes | Set the **Enable earlyoom by default** Global runtime configuration flag `yb.node_agent.enable_earlyoom_by_default` to `true`. |

> | Disable EarlyOOM | Set the **Enable earlyoom by default** Global runtime configuration flag `yb.ui.feature_flags.enable_earlyoom` to `false`, then perform a [rolling restart](../../manage-deployments/edit-config-flags/#modify-configuration-flags) for the change to take effect. |

Author: cc @amannijhawan
